README.md, before:

# Auto PDF to Markdown Agent

## Overview
This project is a Python-based macOS background service that monitors a network folder for new PDF files. When a PDF appears, it uses LM Studio (with a local LLM) to perform optical character recognition (OCR) and converts the content into Markdown format. The Markdown output is saved to a target network directory, and the processed PDF is moved to a 'done' directory. The service is designed to run unattended, survive reboots, and handle multiple PDFs robustly.

## Features
- **Runs as a macOS background service** (LaunchAgent/daemon)
- **Monitors a network folder** for incoming PDFs
- **Invokes LM Studio** and a local model for OCR
- **Outputs Markdown** to a specified directory
- **Moves processed PDFs** to a 'done' directory
- **Handles multiple PDFs** and processes them sequentially
- **Robust error handling and logging**
- **Automatic startup on reboot**
- **Tested with PyTest**
- **Follows Simon Willison’s "perfect commit" principles**
- **GitHub issues managed via `gh` CLI**

## Requirements
- Python 3.9+
- macOS
- Access to LM Studio and a compatible OCR model
- Access to network share directories for input, output, and done folders
- `pytest` for testing
- `gh` CLI for GitHub issue management

## Setup
1. **Clone this repository locally.**
2. **Create and activate a Python virtual environment:**
   ```sh
   python3 -m venv venv
   source venv/bin/activate
   ```
3. **Install dependencies:**
   ```sh
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```
4. **Configure environment variables** for the following required settings (can be set in a `.env` file):
   - `PDF2MD_INPUT_DIR`: Path to the input directory to monitor for PDFs
   - `PDF2MD_OUTPUT_DIR`: Path to the output directory for markdown files
   - `PDF2MD_DONE_DIR`: Path to the directory where processed PDFs are moved
   - `PDF2MD_LM_STUDIO_API`: URL for LM Studio API (e.g., `http://localhost:1234`)
   - `PDF2MD_LOG_FILE`: (optional) Path for the log file (default: `app.log`)
   - `PDF2MD_MD_PAGE_DELIMITER`: (optional) If set to `delimited`, pages are separated with a markdown divider. If `concat`, all pages are appended with no divider. Default: `delimited`

   You may copy `.env.example` to `.env` and edit as needed. The app will automatically load `.env` if `python-dotenv` is installed.
5. **Set up LM Studio** and ensure it is accessible from the service.
6. **Run tests:**
   ```sh
   pytest
   ```

## Usage

To start the service manually, run:
```sh
python -m src.pdf2md_service
```
Or, if running directly:
```sh
python src/pdf2md_service.py
```

- The service will run in the background, monitoring the configured folder.
- Place a PDF in the input directory to trigger processing.
- Markdown files will appear in the output directory; processed PDFs will be moved to the done directory.

**Note:** The LM Studio API URL in your environment variable should include `/v1`, for example:
```
PDF2MD_LM_STUDIO_API=http://localhost:1234/v1
```
If using a remote server, use its address (e.g., `http://192.168.0.74:1234/v1`).

---

## Running as a macOS LaunchAgent (auto-start on login)

You can run this service as a background LaunchAgent so it starts automatically on login/reboot:

### 1. Create a LaunchAgent plist file

Save the following as `~/Library/LaunchAgents/com.yourusername.pdf2md.plist` (replace `yourusername` as appropriate):

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE plist PUBLIC "-//Apple//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN" "http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd">
<plist version="1.0">
<dict>
    <key>Label</key>
    <string>com.yourusername.pdf2md</string>
    <key>ProgramArguments</key>
    <array>
        <string>/Users/YOURUSER/.pyenv/versions/3.13.3/envs/pdf2md/venv/bin/python</string>
        <string>/Users/YOURUSER/Documents/Auto-PDF-to-MD-Agent/src/pdf2md_service.py</string>
    </array>
    <key>WorkingDirectory</key>
    <string>/Users/YOURUSER/Documents/Auto-PDF-to-MD-Agent</string>
    <key>EnvironmentVariables</key>
    <dict>
        <key>PYTHONUNBUFFERED</key>
        <string>1</string>
    </dict>
    <key>StandardOutPath</key>
    <string>/Users/YOURUSER/Documents/Auto-PDF-to-MD-Agent/pdf2md_service.stdout.log</string>
    <key>StandardErrorPath</key>
    <string>/Users/YOURUSER/Documents/Auto-PDF-to-MD-Agent/pdf2md_service.stderr.log</string>
    <key>RunAtLoad</key>
    <true/>
    <key>KeepAlive</key>
    <true/>
</dict>
</plist>
```
- Update all `/Users/YOURUSER/...` paths to your actual username and project location.
- If using a virtualenv, point to the correct Python interpreter.

### 2. Ensure environment variables are set
- Place your `.env` file in the project root (`/Users/YOURUSER/Documents/Auto-PDF-to-MD-Agent/.env`).
- The service loads `.env` automatically if `python-dotenv` is installed.

### 3. Load and start the agent
```sh
launchctl load ~/Library/LaunchAgents/com.yourusername.pdf2md.plist
launchctl start com.yourusername.pdf2md
```
- The service will now start automatically at login.

### 4. Check status and logs
```sh
launchctl list | grep pdf2md
cat /Users/YOURUSER/Documents/Auto-PDF-to-MD-Agent/pdf2md_service.stdout.log
cat /Users/YOURUSER/Documents/Auto-PDF-to-MD-Agent/pdf2md_service.stderr.log
```

### 5. Stop/unload the agent
```sh
launchctl unload ~/Library/LaunchAgents/com.yourusername.pdf2md.plist
```

### Troubleshooting tips
- Ensure all paths in the plist are correct and absolute.
- Make sure your Python environment and dependencies are installed for the user running the agent.
- If the service fails to start, check the stderr log for Python errors.
- You can test the service manually first to ensure all config and dependencies are working before using LaunchAgent.

---

## Logging
- All activity and errors are logged to a file for troubleshooting and auditing.

## Development
- Use PyTest for all tests.
- Follow the "perfect commit" process: small, focused, well-tested commits with clear messages.
- Use the `gh` CLI to manage issues and track progress.

## Project Status

- **Folder monitoring:** Implemented and robust (see `src/monitor.py`).
- **LM Studio OCR integration:** Fully integrated and tested (see `src/ocr.py`).
- **Markdown output:** Implemented; output is configurable and tested.
- **PDF move/cleanup:** Implemented; processed PDFs are moved to a 'done' directory.
- **Logging and error handling:** Unified logging across all modules; all errors and activity are logged to file and console.
- **macOS service integration:** LaunchAgent setup is fully documented; service can run automatically at login/reboot.
- **Testing:** Unit and integration tests provided (see `tests/`).

**Next steps:**
- Continue real-world testing on your network shares and PDFs.
- Refine error handling and logging as needed based on production experience.
- Open GitHub issues for any new feature requests or bugs.

---

*For more details on the perfect commit, see [Simon Willison’s blog](https://simonwillison.net/2020/Oct/9/perfect-commit/).*

Commit message:

Configurable LM Studio model and API key via environment variables; update config, service, .env.example, README, and config tests. Closes #13.

README.md, after:

# Auto PDF to Markdown Agent

## Overview
This project is a Python-based macOS background service that monitors a network folder for new PDF files. When a PDF appears, it uses LM Studio (with a local LLM) to perform optical character recognition (OCR) and converts the content into Markdown format. The Markdown output is saved to a target network directory, and the processed PDF is moved to a 'done' directory. The service is designed to run unattended, survive reboots, and handle multiple PDFs robustly.

## Features
- **Runs as a macOS background service** (LaunchAgent/daemon)
- **Monitors a network folder** for incoming PDFs
- **Invokes LM Studio** and a local model for OCR
- **Outputs Markdown** to a specified directory
- **Moves processed PDFs** to a 'done' directory
- **Handles multiple PDFs** and processes them sequentially
- **Robust error handling and logging**
- **Automatic startup on reboot**
- **Tested with PyTest**
- **Follows Simon Willison’s "perfect commit" principles**
- **GitHub issues managed via `gh` CLI**

## Requirements
- Python 3.9+
- macOS
- Access to LM Studio and a compatible OCR model
- Access to network share directories for input, output, and done folders
- `pytest` for testing
- `gh` CLI for GitHub issue management

## Setup
1. **Clone this repository locally.**
2. **Create and activate a Python virtual environment:**
   ```sh
   python3 -m venv venv
   source venv/bin/activate
   ```
3. **Install dependencies:**
   ```sh
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```
4. **Configure environment variables** for the following required settings (can be set in a `.env` file):
   - `PDF2MD_INPUT_DIR`: Path to the input directory to monitor for PDFs
   - `PDF2MD_OUTPUT_DIR`: Path to the output directory for markdown files
   - `PDF2MD_DONE_DIR`: Path to the directory where processed PDFs are moved
   - `PDF2MD_LM_STUDIO_API`: URL for LM Studio API (e.g., `http://localhost:1234`)
   - `PDF2MD_LM_STUDIO_MODEL`: (optional) Name of the LM Studio model to use for OCR (default: `allenai_olmocr-7b-0225-preview`)
   - `PDF2MD_LM_STUDIO_API_KEY`: (optional) API key for LM Studio (default: `lm-studio`)
   - `PDF2MD_LOG_FILE`: (optional) Path for the log file (default: `app.log`)
   - `PDF2MD_MD_PAGE_DELIMITER`: (optional) If set to `delimited`, pages are separated with a markdown divider. If `concat`, all pages are appended with no divider. Default: `delimited`

   You may copy `.env.example` to `.env` and edit as needed. The app will automatically load `.env` if `python-dotenv` is installed.
5. **Set up LM Studio** and ensure it is accessible from the service.
6. **Run tests:**
   ```sh
   pytest
   ```

## Usage

To start the service manually, run:
```sh
python -m src.pdf2md_service
```
Or, if running directly:
```sh
python src/pdf2md_service.py
```

- The service will run in the background, monitoring the configured folder.
- Place a PDF in the input directory to trigger processing.
- Markdown files will appear in the output directory; processed PDFs will be moved to the done directory.

**Note:** The LM Studio API URL in your environment variable should include `/v1`, for example:
```
PDF2MD_LM_STUDIO_API=http://localhost:1234/v1
```
If using a remote server, use its address (e.g., `http://192.168.0.74:1234/v1`).

---

## Running as a macOS LaunchAgent (auto-start on login)

You can run this service as a background LaunchAgent so it starts automatically on login/reboot:

### 1. Create a LaunchAgent plist file

Save the following as `~/Library/LaunchAgents/com.yourusername.pdf2md.plist` (replace `yourusername` as appropriate):

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE plist PUBLIC "-//Apple//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN" "http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd">
<plist version="1.0">
<dict>
    <key>Label</key>
    <string>com.yourusername.pdf2md</string>
    <key>ProgramArguments</key>
    <array>
        <string>/Users/YOURUSER/.pyenv/versions/3.13.3/envs/pdf2md/venv/bin/python</string>
        <string>/Users/YOURUSER/Documents/Auto-PDF-to-MD-Agent/src/pdf2md_service.py</string>
    </array>
    <key>WorkingDirectory</key>
    <string>/Users/YOURUSER/Documents/Auto-PDF-to-MD-Agent</string>
    <key>EnvironmentVariables</key>
    <dict>
        <key>PYTHONUNBUFFERED</key>
        <string>1</string>
    </dict>
    <key>StandardOutPath</key>
    <string>/Users/YOURUSER/Documents/Auto-PDF-to-MD-Agent/pdf2md_service.stdout.log</string>
    <key>StandardErrorPath</key>
    <string>/Users/YOURUSER/Documents/Auto-PDF-to-MD-Agent/pdf2md_service.stderr.log</string>
    <key>RunAtLoad</key>
    <true/>
    <key>KeepAlive</key>
    <true/>
</dict>
</plist>
```
- Update all `/Users/YOURUSER/...` paths to your actual username and project location.
- If using a virtualenv, point to the correct Python interpreter.

### 2. Ensure environment variables are set
- Place your `.env` file in the project root (`/Users/YOURUSER/Documents/Auto-PDF-to-MD-Agent/.env`).
- The service loads `.env` automatically if `python-dotenv` is installed.

### 3. Load and start the agent
```sh
launchctl load ~/Library/LaunchAgents/com.yourusername.pdf2md.plist
launchctl start com.yourusername.pdf2md
```
- The service will now start automatically at login.

### 4. Check status and logs
```sh
launchctl list | grep pdf2md
cat /Users/YOURUSER/Documents/Auto-PDF-to-MD-Agent/pdf2md_service.stdout.log
cat /Users/YOURUSER/Documents/Auto-PDF-to-MD-Agent/pdf2md_service.stderr.log
```

### 5. Stop/unload the agent
```sh
launchctl unload ~/Library/LaunchAgents/com.yourusername.pdf2md.plist
```

### Troubleshooting tips
- Ensure all paths in the plist are correct and absolute.
- Make sure your Python environment and dependencies are installed for the user running the agent.
- If the service fails to start, check the stderr log for Python errors.
- You can test the service manually first to ensure all config and dependencies are working before using LaunchAgent.

---

## Logging
- All activity and errors are logged to a file for troubleshooting and auditing.

## Development
- Use PyTest for all tests.
- Follow the "perfect commit" process: small, focused, well-tested commits with clear messages.
- Use the `gh` CLI to manage issues and track progress.

## Project Status

- **Folder monitoring:** Implemented and robust (see `src/monitor.py`).
- **LM Studio OCR integration:** Fully integrated and tested (see `src/ocr.py`).
- **Markdown output:** Implemented; output is configurable and tested.
- **PDF move/cleanup:** Implemented; processed PDFs are moved to a 'done' directory.
- **Logging and error handling:** Unified logging across all modules; all errors and activity are logged to file and console.
- **macOS service integration:** LaunchAgent setup is fully documented; service can run automatically at login/reboot.
- **Testing:** Unit and integration tests provided (see `tests/`).

**Next steps:**
- Continue real-world testing on your network shares and PDFs.
- Refine error handling and logging as needed based on production experience.
- Open GitHub issues for any new feature requests or bugs.

---

*For more details on the perfect commit, see [Simon Willison’s blog](https://simonwillison.net/2020/Oct/9/perfect-commit/).*
